# Data for "Testing for heterogeneous rates of discrete character evolution on phylogenies"
 
This repository contains the files for the project "Testing for heterogeneous rates of discrete character evolution on phylogenies" by Liam J. Revell, Klaus P. Schliep, D. L. Mahler, and T. Ingram.

Link to pre-print: 
- https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.09.14.460362

Author for correspondence: 
- Liam J. Revell (liam.revell@umb.edu)

Abstract: 
- Many hypotheses in the field of phylogenetic comparative biology involve specific changes in the rate or process of trait evolution. This is particularly true of approaches designed to connect macroevolutionary pattern to microevolutionary process. We present a method designed to test whether the rate of evolution of a discrete character has changed in one or more clades, lineages, or time periods. This method differs from other related approaches (such as the 'covarion' model) in that the 'regimes' in which the rate or process is postulated to have changed are specified a priori by the user, rather than inferred from the data. Similarly, it differs from methods designed to model a correlation between two binary traits in that the regimes mapped onto the tree are fixed. We apply our method to investigate the rate of dewlap color and/or caudal vertebra number evolution in Caribbean and mainland clades of the diverse lizard genus Anolis. We find little evidence to support any difference in the evolutionary process between mainland and island evolution for either character. We also examine the statistical properties of the method more generally and show that it has acceptable type I error, parameter estimation, and power. Finally, we discuss some general issues of frequentist hypothesis testing and model adequacy, as well as the relationship of our method to existing models of heterogeneity in the rate of discrete character evolution on phylogenies.

Details on content of the repository:

1. `\dewlap-analysis` contains data files and analysis code for the analysis of dewlap color evolution using the model. All files used are present in the folder, which also contains all R code (.Rmd) and a built R markdown file (.pdf) with figures and results. Analyses were undertaken using phytools 2.0.7 with R version 4.3.1. Data files of this folder include:
    * `dewlap_colors_22feb2018.csv` a comma separated value text file with Anolis lizard specific epithets (taxon labels) in column 1, category of geographic distribution in column 2 (labeled `Island`), ecomorphological classification if applicable in column 3 (`Ecomorph`), dewlap color categorization ranked by dominance in columns 4 through 7 (`dominant.color`, `secondary.color`, `tertiary.color`, `quarternary.color`), color of the dewlap scales (if visible) in column 8 (labeled `scales`), categorical description of the dewlap pattern in column 9 (`pattern`), a numeric representation of the number of observably different colors in the dewlap and a reduction of the same to three levels (1, 2, and >3) in columns 10 and 11 (`numcol` and `numcol2`), finally, in column 12 (`domcol`), dewlap color assessed as being subjectively closest to one of the following six states: black (anoles with black, blue, or purple dewlaps); orange (orange or brown dewlaps); pink (pink and peach dewlapped anoles); red; white (white and grey dewlaps); or, finally, yellow (yellow and green dewlaps), as described in the article text. Only the data for column 12 were used in the analysis of our study.
	* `dewlap_tree_22feb2018.phy` a plain text file containing a phylogeny of Anolis lizards obtained from Gamble et al. (2014; doi: 10.1111/evo.12328).
	* `dewlap-analysis.Rdata` an Rdata file containing all of the analysis results for the data of this folder.

2. `\hrm-analysis` contains data files and analysis code for an analysis of dewlap color evolution and caudal vertebra number evolution under the hidden-rates model of Beaulieu et al. (2013), as per reviewer request at JEB. All files used are present in the folder, which also contains all R code. Since this analysis was added in response to reviewer feedback, it was undertaken using phytools 2.3.1 and R version 4.4.1. Data files of this folder include:
	* `morph-hrm-analysis.rda` an Rdata file containing all the analysis results from the hidden-rates models for caudal vertebra number evolution.
	* `dewlap-hrm-analysis.rda` an Rdata file containing all the analysis results from the hidden-rates models for dewlap color evolution.

3. `\morph-analysis` contains data files and analysis code for the analysis of caudal vertebra number evolution using the model. All files used are present in the folder, which also contains all R code (.Rmd) and a built R markdown file (.pdf) with figures and results. Analyses were undertaken using phytools 2.0.7 with R version 4.3.1. Data files of this folder include:
	* `anolis_caudal_vertebrae_data.csv` a comma separated value text file with a numerical index in column 1, Anolis lizard specific epithets (taxon labels) in column 2 (labeled `Species`), the average number of caudal vertebrae in column 3 (`AvgNumber`), and the rounded whole integer number of caudal vertebrae in column 4 (`Vert`).
	* `Gamble_MCC.phy` a plain text file containing a Maximum Clade Credibility phylogeny of Anolis lizards obtained from Gamble et al. (2014; doi: 10.1111/evo.12328). Note that although derived from the same study, this phylogeny contains different taxa from the file `dewlap_tree_22feb2018.phy` and is scaled to different total depth. (It is pruned and re-scaled in our analysis.)
	* `morph-analysis.Rdata` an Rdata file containing all of the analysis results for the data of this folder.

4. `\power-analysis` contains all analysis code for the analysis of type I error and power the model. All files used are present in the folder, which also contains all R code (.Rmd) and a built R markdown file (.pdf) with figures and results. Analyses were undertaken using phytools 2.0.7 with R version 4.3.1. No data files are present in this folder.
